.\" milog(1) — single-host nginx + system + app-error monitor
.\"
.\" This man page is hand-written roff. To preview locally:
.\"   man -l man/milog.1
.\" Or:
.\"   nroff -man man/milog.1 | less
.\"
.\" Source-of-truth note: when adding a new mode to src/dispatch.sh's per-cmd
.\" help registry, mirror it under COMMANDS below. CI does not yet enforce
.\" sync; reviewers should eyeball it.
.\"
.TH MILOG 1 "2026-05-01" "milog" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
milog \- single-host nginx + system + app-error monitor with alerts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B milog
[\fICOMMAND\fR] [\fIARGS\fR ...]
.br
.B milog
[\fB-h\fR | \fB--help\fR | \fBhelp\fR]
.br
.B milog
\fICOMMAND\fR
.B --help
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmilog\fR ships as a single bash bundle plus optional Go binaries
(\fBmilog-web\fR, \fBmilog-tui\fR). It tails nginx access logs, the
systemd journal, docker container logs, and arbitrary text logs from one
host, computes per-app metrics, and fires alerts to Discord, Slack,
Telegram, Matrix, generic webhooks, and user-defined hook scripts.
Bash modes work on any POSIX box with bash 4+; Go binaries unlock the
SSE web dashboard, the bubbletea TUI, and the Prometheus
\fB/metrics\fR endpoint.
.PP
The default invocation
.RB ( "milog" )
tails every configured source with a coloured prefix per source. All
other behaviour is opt-in through a subcommand.
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Live views
.TP
.B monitor
Bash dashboard \(em refresh-and-redraw TUI showing CPU / MEM / DISK +
per-app nginx tables. Keys: \fBq\fR quit, \fBp\fR pause, \fBr\fR refresh,
\fB+\fR/\fB-\fR change rate.
.TP
.B tui
Richer bubbletea TUI in Go. Same data as
.BR monitor .
Requires the
.B milog-tui
companion binary on
.BR PATH .
.TP
.B rate
Nginx-only req/min dashboard.
.TP
.B web
Read-only local HTTP dashboard. Subcommands: \fBstart\fR, \fBstop\fR,
\fBstatus\fR, \fBinstall-service\fR, \fBuninstall-service\fR,
\fBrotate-token\fR. Prefers the
.B milog-web
Go binary (SSE + Prometheus
.BR /metrics )
when present, falls back to a bash
.BR socat (1)
poller otherwise.
.TP
.B daemon
Headless rule evaluator + alerter. No TUI. Refuses to start when
.B milog config validate
reports errors; warnings are allowed.
.SS Per-app inspection
.TP
.B health
Per-app totals \(em 2xx / 3xx / 4xx / 5xx counts.
.TP
.BR top " [\fIN\fR]"
Top \fIN\fR source IPs across all apps (default 10). Adds a country
column when
.B GEOIP_ENABLED=1
and
.BR mmdblookup (1)
is on
.BR PATH .
.TP
.BR top-paths " [\fIN\fR]"
Top \fIN\fR URLs by req / 4xx / 5xx / p95. Excludes
.B SLOW_EXCLUDE_PATHS
(WebSocket paths by default).
.TP
.B attacker " \fIIP\fR"
Forensic view of one IP across apps \(em per-app requests, top paths,
top user-agents, classification, sample lines.
.TP
.BR slow " [\fIN\fR]"
Top \fIN\fR slow endpoints by p95. Requires
.B $request_time
in nginx
.BR log_format ;
excludes WebSocket paths.
.TP
.BR ws " [\fIN\fR]"
WebSocket session metrics \(em duration distribution, longest, long-session
flag, top paths per app.
.TP
.B stats " \fIAPP\fR"
Hourly request histogram for one app.
.TP
.BR trend " [\fIAPP\fR] [\fIHOURS\fR]"
Sparkline from history (requires
.BR HISTORY_ENABLED=1 ).
.TP
.B diff
Per-app: now vs 1d ago vs 7d ago.
.TP
.BR auto-tune " [\fIDAYS\fR]"
Suggest threshold values from history data.
.TP
.B replay " \fIFILE\fR"
Postmortem for one archived log file.
.SS Search and filter
.TP
.B search " \fIPATTERN\fR [\fIFLAGS\fR]"
Grep across current + archived log files.
Flags:
.BR --since ,
.BR --app ,
.BR --path ,
.BR --regex ,
.BR --archives ,
.BR --limit .
.TP
.BR errors " [\fIFLAGS\fR]"
Live tail (default) or summary report (\fB--since\fR /\fB--source\fR
/\fB--pattern\fR). Live mode: nginx sources show 4xx/5xx, others show
app-pattern matches. Summary mode: scans
.B alerts.log
for
.B app:<src>:<pat>
fires within the window.
.TP
.B exploits
Live tail of LFI / RCE / SQLi / XSS / infra-probe payload hits.
.TP
.B probes
Live tail of scanner / bot user-agent traffic.
.TP
.BR patterns " [\fBlist\fR]"
App-error pattern detector across all sources. Built-ins: Go panic,
Python traceback, Java stacktrace, Node UPR, OOM, segfault,
ERROR/FATAL/CRITICAL.
.B milog patterns list
shows the merged catalog (built-ins + overrides + custom).
.TP
.B grep " \fIAPP\fR \fIPATTERN\fR"
Filter-tail one app.
.TP
.BR suspects " [\fIN\fR] [\fIWINDOW\fR]"
Heuristic bot ranking.
.SS Configuration
.TP
.B config
Show resolved config + destinations + apps (no args).
.br
Subs: \fBshow\fR, \fBpath\fR, \fBinit\fR, \fBedit\fR, \fBadd\fR \fINAME\fR,
\fBrm\fR \fINAME\fR, \fBdir\fR \fIPATH\fR, \fBset\fR \fIKEY\fR \fIVALUE\fR,
\fBvalidate\fR.
.TP
.B alert " \fISUB\fR"
Toggle alerting + systemd service. Subs: \fBon\fR, \fBoff\fR, \fBstatus\fR,
\fBtest\fR.
.TP
.BR alerts " [\fIWINDOW\fR]"
Fire history reader. Window grammar: \fBtoday\fR, \fByesterday\fR,
\fBall\fR, \fIN\fBm\fR, \fIN\fBh\fR, \fIN\fBd\fR, \fIN\fBw\fR (default
\fBtoday\fR).
.TP
.B silence " \fIRULE\fR \fIDURATION\fR [\fIMESSAGE\fR]"
Mute a rule. Also: \fBsilence list\fR, \fBsilence clear\fR \fIRULE\fR.
.TP
.BR digest " [\fIWINDOW\fR]"
Exec-summary for the period.
.TP
.B doctor
Diagnostic checklist \(em flags every degraded optional capability with a
one-line fix.
.SS Distribution
.TP
.B install " \fIFEATURE\fR"
On-demand feature installer. Features:
.BR geoip ,
.BR web ,
.BR history .
.B install list
shows installed state.
.TP
.B completions " <\fBinstall\fR | \fBbash\fR | \fBzsh\fR | \fBfish\fR>"
Install / print shell completion script.
.TP
.BR bench " [\fB--full\fR] [\fB--baseline\fR \fIFILE\fR]"
Synthetic-fixture timing harness for CI baseline comparison.
.SH GLOBAL HELP
.TP
.B milog --help
List all commands (slim main help).
.TP
.B milog \fICOMMAND\fR --help
Detailed per-command help block (usage / args / 1\(en2 examples).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/milog/config.sh
User config file (sourced as bash). Override path with
.BR MILOG_CONFIG .
Template via
.BR "milog config init" .
.TP
.I ~/.cache/milog/
Default
.B ALERT_STATE_DIR
\(em holds
.BR alerts.log ,
.BR alerts.state
(cooldown timestamps),
.B alerts.fingerprints
(cross-rule dedup), and
.BR alerts.silences .
.TP
.I ~/.config/systemd/user/milog-web.service
Web dashboard user unit (written by
.BR "milog web install-service" ).
.TP
.I /var/log/nginx/<app>.access.log
Default per-app log location. Override
.B LOG_DIR
to change.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
Every config variable has a matching
.BR MILOG_ *
override. Common ones:
.TP
.B MILOG_CONFIG
Alternate config file path (default
.IR ~/.config/milog/config.sh ).
.TP
.B MILOG_LOG_DIR
Override
.BR LOG_DIR .
.TP
.B MILOG_APPS
Space-separated list, overrides
.BR LOGS .
.TP
.B MILOG_ALERTS_ENABLED
Master alert switch. Set to
.B 1
to fire alerts.
.TP
.B MILOG_PATTERNS_ENABLED
App-error pattern detector switch (default
.BR 1 ).
.TP
.B MILOG_DISCORD_WEBHOOK ", " MILOG_SLACK_WEBHOOK ", " MILOG_TELEGRAM_BOT_TOKEN
Per-destination credentials.
.TP
.B MILOG_DOCKER_ROOT
Docker state dir for
.B docker:
sources when
.BR docker (1)
inspect is unavailable (default
.IR /var/lib/docker ).
.PP
See
.B milog config
for the complete env-var table.
.SH LOG SOURCES
The
.B LOGS
array names log sources. Four prefixes are recognised; bare names default
to nginx.
.TP
.BR api ", " nginx:api
Nginx app at
.IR $LOG_DIR/api.access.log .
.TP
.B text:\fINAME\fR:\fIPATH\fR
Arbitrary text log at the absolute
.IR PATH .
.TP
.B journal:\fIUNIT\fR
Systemd journal for
.IR UNIT
\(em streamed via
.BR journalctl (1)
.BR -f .
.TP
.B docker:\fICONTAINER\fR
Docker container's JSON log file, unwrapped on read via
.BR jq (1)
or
.BR sed (1).
.PP
Streaming, filtering (\fBlogs\fR, \fBgrep\fR, \fBsearch\fR, raw
\fBmilog \fIname\fR tail) work uniformly across all four source types.
Parsing modes (\fBmonitor\fR, \fBtop\fR, \fBslow\fR, \fBtop-paths\fR,
alerts, web dashboard) require nginx combined-log format.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Error \(em invalid arguments, unknown command, broken config, missing
required tool. Diagnostic on stderr.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Bash dashboard with default refresh:
.B milog monitor
.TP
Live tail of all sources, coloured per source:
.B milog
.TP
Top 20 source IPs in the last hour:
.B "milog top 20"
.TP
Filter-tail one app for a pattern:
.B "milog grep api timeout"
.TP
Recent app-pattern fires across every source:
.B "milog errors --since 1d"
.TP
Mute a noisy rule for 1 hour:
.B "milog silence app:api:panic_go 1h \(dqdeploying fix\(dq"
.TP
Web dashboard as a systemd user service:
.B "milog web install-service && systemctl --user start milog-web"
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR journalctl (1),
.BR jq (1),
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR nginx (8).
.PP
Project documentation:
.IR /usr/share/doc/milog/ .
.br
Project home:
.I https://github.com/chud-lori/milog
